---
title: git-cd
tags: git, bash
...

While I was going through a 3rd party git repository the other day, it occurred
to me that it would be nice to have shell command `git-cd`, which would be
like `cd`, but working with file paths relative to current git repository. And
it turned out that this can be relatively easy to implement in bash.

<!--more-->

First of all we need to figure out a path to the current *git working tree*,
which can be easily shown like this:


```
$ git rev-parse --show-toplevel
```

Btw I defined git alias `root` for this command in my `.gitconfig`, but it's
not necessary for functionality of `git-cd` itself.

Since we need to change current working directory within a shell session, there
is no other way than to create a shell function (defined eg. in `~/.bashrc`):

``` bash
git-cd()
{
  if ! GIT_ROOT=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel); then
    return 1
  fi
  if [[ $# = 0 ]]; then
    cd "${GIT_ROOT}"
  elif [[ "$1" = - ]]; then
    cd -
  else
    cd "${GIT_ROOT}/$1"
  fi
}
```

The function works like this: when `git-cd` is called without any parameters,
it changes current working directory to a root directory of the current git
repository (assuming we are in some git repo). Otherwise it tries to change
directory to given directory, interpreting it's path relative to the repo:

```
$ cd /home/martin/projects/nitrate/trunk/nitrate/docs
$ git root
/home/martin/projects/nitrate
$ git-cd design/Milestone
$ pwd
/home/martin/projects/nitrate/design/Milestone
$ git-cd
$ pwd
/home/martin/projects/nitrate
```

Even though this works well already, such function would not be complete
without bash completion support. Luckily this isn't hard to do either:

``` bash
# bash autocompletion for git-cd
_git-cd()
{
  if ! GIT_ROOT=$(git rev-parse --show-toplevel); then
    return 1
  fi
  # current word to complete
  local CUR=${COMP_WORDS[COMP_CWORD]}
  # remove absolute paths
  if [[ "$CUR" =~ ^/ ]]; then
    CUR=${CUR#"/"}
  fi
  COMPREPLY=($(cd $GIT_ROOT; compgen -S '/' -d $CUR))
}
complete -o nospace -F _git-cd git-cd
```

And this brings us to usable solution :-)

One small problem (for some people) could be that the shell function can't
be directly called via `git cd` because it's not a script, but a shell
function. While this doesn't bother me, it could be workarounded by definition
of another shell function `git`, which would work as a wrapper:

``` bash
git()
{
  if [[ $1 = cd ]]; then
    git-cd "$2"
  else
    /usr/bin/git "$@"
  fi
}
```

But that would break the bash completion. This is most likely not impossible
to solve, but I don't personally consider that to be worth the effort :)

And obviously, I'm not the first one with an idea like this, see for example:

- [a cd command for git projects](http://www.michaelvobrien.com/blog/2009/01/a-cd-command-for-git-projects/)
- [jumping to git roots](http://codification.wordpress.com/2011/11/14/jumping-to-git-roots/)
- [cdgit cd relative to git workdir root](http://git.661346.n2.nabble.com/cdgit-cd-relative-to-git-workdir-root-td7596367.html)
  (this example is interesting especially for users of `zsh`, as it contains
  a reference to one liner solution ...)

On the other hand, I haven't found anything like this neither in `git/contrib`
nor bashrc files of any GNU/Linux distribution.
