---
title: The Machine Stops
tags: science-fiction, reading-notes, translated, backdated
updated: 2025-09-14T14:32:03+02:00
...

Once again, I've come across a science fiction short story whose author
managed, in a certain sense, to estimate the impact of technological
development possibilities surprisingly well for his time. And even though the
story celebrates its 110th anniversary since first publication this year, and
its author couldn't actually imagine digital computing technology at all, it
sometimes tempts readers to compare it with the possibilities of today's
internet.

<!--more-->

The short story
[The Machine Stops](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Machine_Stops) was
written by [E. M.  Forster](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E._M._Forster) and it
was first published in 1909. In Czech, it appeared as [Stroj se
zastaví](https://www.databazeknih.cz/povidky/stroj-se-zastavi-12077) translated
by [Jiří Janda](https://www.databazeknih.cz/prekladatele/jiri-janda-1692) only
in 2011 as part of the Czech edition of the collection [Síň slávy II
B](https://www.legie.info/kniha/13291-ben-bova-sin-slavy-mistru-sf-ii-b), which
originally appeared in 1973 as [The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume
Two](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Science_Fiction_Hall_of_Fame,_Volume_Two).

I've always imagined the era when the author wrote the story as a time of rapid
technoscientific progress and the resulting techno-optimism. Among other
things, the telephone network was already gradually growing and improving
(though still quite in its infancy), increasingly practical
[airships](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airship#Early_20th_century)
and [heavier-than-air
aircraft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wright_brothers#Adding_power) were
attempting their first flights. And even though programmable computers didn't
exist yet, [tabulators working with punched
cards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tabulating_machine) were already
[significantly facilitating mass data
processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1890_United_States_census#Methodology).
On the other hand, in 1909 there was still no public radio broadcasting or
civil aviation in operation. And the First World War, which would drive
technological progress further but cool down optimism to the same degree, was
still fewer than 5 years away.

Despite all this (or perhaps precisely because of it?), the story describes
what appears to us as an insane dystopia, where people live more or less
physically separated from one another and where all communication and most
human needs are handled by machines.

I don't want to spoil too much here or get bogged down in
philosophical-sociological reflections on the story's main message. Forster
certainly didn't aim to predict specific directions of technological progress.
However, I would pause at several thoughts and ideas that caught my attention
in the story.

For example, the description of air transport is quite bold even from today's
perspective, if we overlook the fact that airships are still used in the future
:-) The author, at a time when aviation was taking its first steps, imagines a
world where the system of civil international aviation has long achieved full
automation and enormous transport capacity, but as a relic of the past, almost
no one uses it anymore because people prefer virtual communication mediated by
machines.

When you read the story from today's perspective, you can't help comparing it
with today's possibilities, for example in descriptions of video calls,
"online" lectures, music playback, the number of acquaintances or "friends"
given in thousands, or handling "unread messages". However, it would be bold to
claim that Forster predicts today's internet. Rather, he tries to describe a
world where, from his perspective, human dependence on machines is driven to
absurd proportions, and to think through some possible consequences of all
this.

The story also explores the complexity of the technology itself, which people
no longer really understand without being willing to admit it. This leads the
author to argue that human development is actually replaced by the development
of the machine, which has taken power over humanity. However, Forster doesn't
write directly about artificial intelligence, and is more interested in the
resulting human helplessness.

At certain moments, the story's environment might in particular details remind
one of the world from the movies
[THX 1138](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/THX_1138),
[Brazil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazil_(1985_film)), or
[The Matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Matrix). But these are minor
details or general ideas; don't try to find a direct relationship between these
movies and the story. On the other hand, this illustrates a certain timeless
quality of the story. If someone replaced the specific technological concepts
of the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries with what we have now, such a
reworked version could still be published today.

## References

Text of the story in English:

* [The Machine Stops by E. M. Forster](http://www.feedbooks.com/book/2073/the-machine-stops)
  in epub format for download
* [The Machine Stops](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Machine_Stops)
  on wikisource.org

For the Czech translation, one needs to reach for the book [Síň slávy II
B](https://www.legie.info/kniha/13291-ben-bova-sin-slavy-mistru-sf-ii-b).
But I can at least link to the article [100 let od Zastavení
Stroje](https://clanky.rvp.cz/clanek/s/Z/10857/100-LET-OD-ZASTAVENI-STROJE.html/)
(100 Years Since The Machine Stopped), where you can find a short excerpt from
the story's text.
